---
layout: post
title:  "Types of Play"
date:   2020-10-03 09:58:00
categories: jekyll update
visible: 1
---

There are two protagonists in *The Last of Us Part II*. Players walk through war-ridden and zombie-infested Seattle in Ellie's shoes. Then, the tables turn on Ellie and she faces the barrel of a gun. Players then walk in Abby's shoes from the beginning of the first day until the final confrontation.

The perspective switch occurs in a theater. This is rather suggestive.

* * *

There are two protagonists in *Dishonored 2*. Well, I say two but players only play as one character of their choosing and this choice is made at the beginning of the game. It is the first of many choices: the game presents a tremendous degree of freedom in the way players can dispatch or avoid enemies. Players can brutally murder high-profile targets, or they can find non-lethal ways of putting them out of the picture.

The same cannot be said for *The Last of Us Part II*. Ellie always kills Jordan, Nora, Owen, and Mel. There is also a dog that Ellie kills, a source of much discomfort for some players. But by the same token, Abby always saves Lev and Yara. She always wishes to "lighten the load."

* * *

"Ellie always kills" and "Abby always saves." The literary present is funny thing. It is as if time behaves differently in fiction than in our reality. We flow down time's river but Abby and Ellie? They are frozen. Yet all it takes for these characters to come to life is for us to boot up the games once more. Or just write about them. We pull them out of their sleep and bring them with us, into real time.

But "Ellie *always* kills" and "Abby *always* saves." Their paths have been fixed by their writers. To play *The Last of Us Part II* is to play Ellie and to play Abby.

* * *

Actors play different roles: saints and sinners, ordinary folk and extraordinary heroes, the passionate and the measured. The theatrical audience accepts this. They know there is a difference between actor and character. Iago is a villain and Othello is easily misled by him; *Othello* judges them, not the actors and not the audience.

As Ellie's hunt for Abby intensifies and her body count escalates, it becomes abundantly clear what she is turning into. It is clear to her and clear to the player. The violence is harrowing and psychologically damaging. This is a cautionary tale, told in blood.

Of course, the blood we see in the game is no more real than the blood we see in a Shakespeare performance. We are playing Ellie and playing Abby. It is role-playing in theatric sense of the word "role." Differences in play style are real, to be sure, but our journeys do not deviate too far from one another. The path that Ellie takes and the path that Abby takes have been fixed by their writers. We are enacting their design and are not judged.

* * *

As stated before, the design of *Dishonored 2* allows for more player agency. On the way to stop the wicked usurper Delilah, Emily/Corvo can be ruthlessly slicing their enemies in one playthrough and gently knocking them out in another. It is fun to play as these characters.

This is due in no small part to the Outsider, a young man bound to another realm who grants the player character with magical powers. He has done this before and has always bore witness to the consequences.

The Outsider was once a human boy, an orphan caught by a cult and used to bring order to a chaotic world. He lives in pain, the victim of powerful men and women. It was not the first time someone was exploited for some notion of progress and it certainly is not the last. The villains of the game (indeed, the franchise) are presented as villains because they wield power but not in a responsible way.

Given supernatural abilities, the player is free to decide how to use them. Ruthless or merciful. The path is up to us to make. And yet the lesson still needs to be told: excessive violence leads to a "high chaos" ending, with Corvo or Emily becoming a brutal dictator. It's abundantly clear what they turn into. A cautionary tale, told in blood.

In *Dishonored 2*, we are responsible for the consequences of the choices we make. We *play*, as a fictional character, but in their world and therefore according to that world's rules.

* * *

Video game discourse is rocky, due in no small part to the fact that our language is underdeveloped. It is useful, then, to keep these two types of play in mind. Are we playing a role written by someone else? Are we playing in a world whose rules were designed by someone else? And what are these games trying to teach us?